The "Heart of Perfect Wisdom" in 25 Lines
Homage to the Perfection of Wisdom, the Lovely, the Holy!
Thus have I heard at one time. The Lord dwelled at Rājagṛha, on the Vulture Peak, together with a large gathering of both monks and Bodhisattvas. At that time the Lord, after he had taught the discourse on dharma called «deep splendour», had entered into concentration.
At that time also the holy Lord Avalokita, the Bodhisattva, the great being, coursed in the course of the deep perfection of wisdom, he looked down from on high, and he saw the five skandhas, and he surveyed them as empty in their own-being.
Thereupon the Venerable Śāriputra, through the Buddha’s might, said to the holy Lord Avalokita, the Bodhisattva, the great being:
«How should a son or daughter of good family train themselves if they want to course in the course of this deep perfection of wisdom?» The holy Lord Avalokita, the Bodhisattva, the great being, then said to the Venerable Śāriputra:
«The son or daughter of good family who wants to course in the course of this deep perfection of wisdom should thus consider: «There are the five skandhas, and those he sees in their own-being as empty.Here, O Śāriputra, form is emptiness and the very emptiness is form; emptiness is no other than form, form is no other than emptiness; whatever is form that is emptiness, whatever is emptiness that is form.
The same is true of feelings, perceptions, impulses and consciousness.
Thus, O Śāriputra, all dharmas are empty of own-being, are without marks; they are neither produced nor stopped, neither defiled nor immaculate, neither deficient nor complete.Therefore then, O Śāriputra, where there is emptiness there is no form, no being, no perception, no impulse, no consciousness;no eye, ear, nose, tongue, body or mind;no form, no sound, no smell, no taste, no touchable, no object of mind;no sight-organ element, etc., until we come to: no mind-consciousness element;
there is no ignorance, no extinction of ignorance, etc., until we come to: there is no old age and death, no extinction of old age and death; there is no suffering, no origination, no stopping, no (141) path; there is no cognition, no attainment and no non-attainment.
«Therefore the, O Śāriputra, owing to a Bodhisattva’s indifference to any kind of personal attainment he dwells as one who has relied solely on the perfection of wisdom.In the absence of an objective support to his thought he has not been made to tremble, he has overcome what can upset, in the end sustained by Nirvana.All those who appear as Buddhas in the three periods of time––through having relied on the perfection of wisdom they fully awake to the utmost, right and perfect enlightenment.
«Therefore one should know the Prajñāpāramitā as the great spell, the spell of great knowledge, the utmost spell, the unequalled spell, allayer of all suffering, in truth––for what could go wrong?In the Prajñāpāramitā has this spell been uttered.It runs like this: GONE, GONE, GONE BEYOND, GONE ALTOGETHER BEYOND, O WHAT AN AWAKENING, ALL HAIL!It is thus, O Śāriputra, that a Bodhisattva should train himself in the course of the deep perfection of wisdom.»
Thereupon the Lord emerged from that concentration, and he applauded the holy Lord Avalokita, the Bodhisattva, the great being: «Well said, well said,son of good family! Just so, son of good family, just so should one course in the course of the deep perfection of wisdom. As you have explained it, so it is approved by all the Tathagatas.»Thus spoke the Lord. Enraptured the Venerable Śāriputra, the holy Lord Avalokita, the Bodhisattva, the great being, and those monks and those Bodhisattvas, great beings, and the whole world with its gods, men, asuras, garudas and gandharvas rejoiced in the Lord’s teaching.
----------